Building on Windows 
===================

This page gives instructions for building Virtuoso Open-Source Edition 
on Windows platforms, both 32-bit and 64-bit.

Prerequisites 
=============

You need the following development tools and software installed:

* Microsoft Visual Studio 
  - VS2003 for 32-bit Windows
  - VS2005 for 64-bit Windows
* Cygwin `bash` with developer tools (`gawk`, `flex`, `bison`) installed: 
  ```
  Package   Version 
  flex      2.5.33
  bison     2.3
  gperf     2.7.2
  gawk      3.1.1
  ```
* Active Perl, available from http://www.activestate.com/ActivePerl
* OpenSSL version 1.0.2 static libraries for Windows and header files.

You may also want to install:

* Java Development Kit (JDK; a JRE is not sufficient) version 1.4 (Java 4) 
  or above for Windows, available from
  http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/index.html
* PHP version 4 library and header files for Windows, available 
  from http://php.net/releases/
* Active Python, available from http://www.activestate.com/ActivePython
* ImageMagick library, available from http://www.imagemagick.org/


Building the OpenSSL library
============================

The OpenSSL library must be built as a static library using Visual Studio.
Detailed instructions for building OpenSSL can be found in the `INSTALL.W32`
document in the OpenSSL source distribution.

***IMPORTANT:** By default, the OpenSSL library is built using `MSVCRT` compile 
flags, leading to conflicts when linking the Virtuoso Open-Source binaries. To 
resolve the conflicts, after unpacking the OpenSSL source tarball, you will 
need to edit the `/util/pl/VC-32.pl` and change the `cflags` to use the `/MT` 
and `/MTd` compiler switches instead of the `/MD` and `/MDd`.*

Finally the `libeay32.lib` and `ssleay32.lib` from `/out32` and files from 
`/inc32/openssl` must be copied to the `<Virtuoso Open Source dir>/win32/openssl/`.

Microsoft Visual Studio (VS) settings
=====================================

Visual Studio (VS) 2003 
-----------------------
In order for VS to find the Cygwin developer tools (`gawk`, `bison`, `flex`),
the path to the Cygwin programs (e.g., `c:/cygwin/bin`) must be added to
standard settings.

To do this, execute the following steps:

1. Open Microsoft VS 2003 IDE
2. Open "**Tools**", then "**Options**"
3. From the "**Options**" menu, select "**Projects**" settings
4. From "**Projects**" settings, select "**VC++ Directories**"
5. Add the Cygwin programs path to the list for "**Executable files**", 
   before the `/system32` directory, so it will use cygwin's `find` command
6. Confirm the changes.

Visual Studio (VS) 2005 (required for 64-bit Windows) 
-----------------------------------------------------
* The same as for VS 2003
* The projects and solution are maintained under VS 2003, so they must be
  converted to the VS 2005 format. To do this, just open the solution with 
  VS 2005, and you will be asked to confirm project conversion.
* When you are asked about conversion, follow the instructions on screen.
* To build the 64-bit Windows targets, use the solution from `/win64`.
* ***Note** The Virtuoso OLEDB provider cannot be built under VS 2005; it should 
  be disabled.*

Known issues
============
* `bison` version 2.1, as installed with Cygwin bash, generates buggy 
  code. To resolve this, please upgrade `bison` to 2.3, or edit the 
  problematic files generated by bison 2.1 (`libsrc/Wi/sql3.c` and 
  `libsrc/Wi/turtle_p.c`) and remove the line `;` after the line 
  `yyparse()`, as shown in this snippet --
  ```
  ...
  #else
  int
  yyparse ()
  ;                       <-- remove this
  #endif
  #endif
  ...
  ```
* The Virtuoso OLEDB provider cannot be built under VS 2005; it should 
  be disabled.

Build targets
=============

Core components
---------------

* `virtuoso_t` - the Virtuoso Server
* `isql`, `isqlo` - SQL command line tools
* `virtoledb` - Virtuoso OLEDB provider *should be disabled under VS 2005*
* `wi`, `wic`, `dk1t`, `dksrv`, `threads`, `threadw`, `xml`, `zlib`, 
    `tidy`, `util` - library modules

Optional components
-------------------

* `tpcc`, `blobs`, `scroll`, `burstoff`, `cutter`, `cursor` - test suite programs
* `libvirtuoso_t` - the Virtuoso server shared object, needed for hosting
    servers
* `virtodbc` - Virtuoso ODBC Driver
* `virtuoso_clr_t` - .NET CLR-hosting server (requires .NET Framework SDK v1.1)
* `virtuoso_javavm_t` - Java hosting server (requires Java SDK)
* `virtuoso_sample_t` - sample of the Virtuoso server with extensions
* `hosting_perl` - Perl hosting plugin (requires Active Perl)
* `hosting_python` - Python hosting plugin (requires Active Python)
* `wikiv` - Virtuoso Wiki plugin
* `im` - ImageMagick plugin (requires ImageMagick library)


Building Virtuoso Open Source with Microsoft Visual Studio 2003
===============================================================

1. Open the IDE.
2. Open the solution file from `/win32/virtuoso-opensource.sln`.
3. Select desired configuration (Debug or Release).
4. Build the solution.

Building optional components
----------------------------

PHP5 library notes
------------------

The following directories with the header files from the PHP5 source tree need
to be placed under `/win32/php5/`:

* `ext/`
* `main/`
* `regex/`
* `TSRM/`
* `win32/`
* `Zend/`

Building the Virtuoso Open-Source Java hosting binary under Visual Studio 2003
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Make sure that JDK 1.4 or later is installed; a JRE is not sufficient.
2. Add environment setting `JDK_PATH` with value of JDK installation directory
   (e.g., `c:\jdk1.5`).
3. Start the Visual Studio IDE, and enable the `virtuoso_javavm_t` target 
   in the solution.
4. Build the `virtuoso_javavm_t` target.

Building the Virtuoso Open-Source Perl hosting plugin
-----------------------------------------------------

1. Make sure Active Perl is installed.
2. From the VS.NET 2003 command prompt, go to `/win32`.
3. Run `perl mkperlenv.pl`. This should produce output like:
   ```
   PERL_CFLAGS=...
   PERL_LDFLAGS=...
   ```
4. Add the `PERL_CFLAGS` and `PERL_LDFLAGS` in the environment with 
   values printed from the step above.
5. Start the Visual Studio IDE and enable the `hosting_perl` target 
   in the solution.
6. Build the `hosting_perl plugin`.

Building the Virtuoso Open-Source Python hosting plugin
-------------------------------------------------------

1. Make sure Active Python is installed.
2. From the VS.NET 2003 command prompt, go to `/win32`.
3. Run `python mkpythonenv.py`. This should produce output like:
   ```
   PYTHON_CFLAGS=...
   PYTHON_LDFLAGS=...
   ```
4. Add the `PYTHON_CFLAGS` and `PYTHON_LDFLAGS` in the environment with 
   values printed from the step above.
5. Start the Visual Studio IDE, and enable the `hosting_python` target 
   in the solution.
6. Build the `hosting_python` plugin.

Building the Virtuoso Open-Source ImageMagick plugin
----------------------------------------------------

1. Install the ImageMagick library, available from http://www.imagemagick.org/.
2. Add the `IM_PATH` in the environment with a value of the ImageMagick 
   installation directory.
3. Start the Visual Studio IDE, and enable the `im` target in the solution.
4. Build the ImageMagick plugin.

Running the tests
=================
1. Make sure that following binaries exist in `/win32/[Release|Debug]`
   * `virtuoso-t.exe`
   * `isql.exe`
   * `blobs.exe`
   * `ins.exe`
   * `scroll.exe`
2. Open a Cygwin bash shell
3. Change directory to `/`
4. Execute the commands below.  ***Note:** In `$PATH`, replace `Release` 
   with `Debug`, if you are going to run the tests using debug binaries.*
   ```
    export HOME=`pwd`
    export PATH=$HOME/win32/Release:$PATH
    export BLOBS=blobs.exe
    export INS=ins.exe
    export ISQL=isql.exe
    export PORT=5555
    export ENABLE_MTS_TEST=0
    export SCROLL=scroll.exe
    export GETDATA=getdata.exe
   ```
5. Change directory to `/binsrc/tests/suite`
6. Run the tests:
   ```
   ./test_server virtuoso-t
   ```

Installation
============

ODBC Driver registration
------------------------

To register the Virtuoso Open-Source ODBC driver, perform the
following steps:

1. Open a CMD/DOS prompt
2. `cd` to the directory where the `virtodbc.dll` (Virtuoso Open Source ODBC
    Driver) was built.
3. Execute:
   ```
   regsvr32 virtodbc.dll
   ```
4. A confirmation dialog stating that the driver was registered should be
   displayed.

Running the Demo Database
=========================
1. Make a folder, e.g., `c:\dbs\virtuoso`
2. Copy the Demo database and default `demo.ini` file to it
   ```
   cd c:
   cd \dbs\virtuoso
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.db
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.ini
   ```
3. Create a Windows service to run the Virtuoso Open-Source server:
   ```
   SET PATH=<Virtuoso Open Source dir>\win32\Release
   virtuoso-t -c demo -I Demo -S create
   virtuoso-t -c demo -I Demo -S start
   ```
4. Connect with the command line SQL tool:
   ```
   isql 1112 dba dba
   ```
5. As the `SQL>` prompt that brings, switch to the demo database, 
   containing the Microsoft Northwind sample tables, by typing --
   ```
   SQL> use Demo;
   ```
6. You can get further instructions from the isql helo --
   ```
   SQL> help;
   ```
7. To use the web admin interface, point your browser to --
   ```
   http://localhost:8890/conductor
   ```
8. To read the online documentation, point your browser to --
   ```
   http://localhost:8890/doc/html
   ```
9. To experiment with online tutorials, point your browser to --
   ```
   http://localhost:8890/tutorial
   ```
10. For VAD Packages, see the `README` file for Linux.

.NET CLR hosting server
=======================

To run the .NET CLR hosting server (`virtuoso-clr-t`):

1. Make a folder, e.g., `c:\dbs\virtuoso`
2. copy the Demo database and default `demo.ini` file to it
   ```
   cd c:
   cd \dbs\virtuoso
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.db
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.ini
   ```
3. Register the `virt_http.dll` in the GAC:
   ```
   gacutil /i <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\win32\Release\virt_http.dll
   ```
4. Make sure `virtclr.dll` and `virtuoso-clr-t` are in the `%PATH%`.
5. To try the tutorial examples, the `Point.dll` and `tax.dll` must 
   be copied from the `\binsrc\tutorial\hosting\ho_s_2` directory 
   to the `\win32\Release` directory:
   ```
   SET PATH=<Virtuoso Open Source dir>\win32\Release
   virtuoso-clr-t -c demo -I Demo -S create
   virtuoso-clr-t -c demo -I Demo -S start
   ```
   ***IMPORTANT:** The current version of the .NET CLR hosting server 
   is supported in .NET Framework v1.1 environment.*

Java hosting server
===================

In order to run the Java hosting server (`virtuoso-javavm-t`):

1. Make a folder, e.g., `c:\dbs\virtuoso`
2. Copy the Demo database and default `demo.ini` file to it:
   ```
   cd c:
   cd \dbs\virtuoso
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.db
   copy <Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\samples\demo\demo.ini
   ```
3. Set the `%CLASSPATH%` to the place where Java classes are.
4. Make sure `virtuoso-javavm-t` is in the `%PATH%`.
   ```
   set CLASSPATH=<Virtuoso Open Source dir>\binsrc\tutorial\hosting\ho_s_1;%CLASSPATH%
   SET PATH=PATH<Virtuoso Open Source dir>\win32\Release
   virtuoso-javavm-t -c demo -I Demo -S create
   virtuoso-javavm-t -c demo -I Demo -S start
   ```
